# Facial-Recognition-Project
Created a facial recognition program that analyzes an image and correlates it with the most similar image in a database of pictures of faces.

Introduction: Since computers only understand and operate with sequences of 0’s and 1’s, images are stored in their memory or hard-drive as arrays or matrices of numbers. What we perceive in the physical world as colors is no more than values which encode light intensity in the digital world. Since Linear Algebra is based on matrix and vector operations it consitutes one of the most powerful tools to process and analyze images. In this Lab Project we will explore some of its capabilities. As mentioned above, images are represented as numbers. For black-and-white images (or grayscale images) the value of each pixel is most commonly represented in the computer by 8 bits of information (0’s or 1’s). As such, there is 28 combinations of sequences or else integer values in the range of 0−255 can be represented. The value 0 corresponds to the absolute black color, the value 255 to the absolute white color, while values in between represent diﬀerent shades of gray. Obviously, for representing a color image we would need more bits to encode the color. This is indeed the case. Each color image is represented by a set of triplets of 8 bits, each one corresponding to a value of Red, Green or Blue colors. In other words, a color image of size m×n can be represented as a 3D matrix of size m×n×3. Each one of the depth layers of the matrix corresponds to the intensity of a diﬀerent color in the scene and the linear combination of their values is perceived by the human eye as a diﬀerent color. 

Project Design: The main idea behind our facial recognition software is ﬁnding the face image that looks most similar to the query image. Assume that we have access to a database of labeled images, i.e., images that depict people whose identity is known and these images have been appropriately labeled. Now, if one sends a query face image for recognition, the most straightforward way to recognize this face is to look through the images in the database and ﬁnd the one which is most similar to our query image. Since the images in the database are labeled, ﬁnding the image with the most similar appearance implies that the identity of the person in the image can be found, assuming that the face of this person exists in the database. Obviously, the problem is not that simple and there is ongoing research on the topic for images that have been corrupted by noise, occlusions, facial expressions, lighting variations, etc. However, in this Lab Project we want to introduce the main concepts behind the topic and we will present them in a simple and straightforward way. Assume that we have access to N RGB images (color images) of players. Also, assume that the size of each one of the R, G and B Channels in each image is m × n = M. One can read these images, convert them to grayscale, vectorize them and store them in the columns of a matrix (database) D of size M ×N, i.e., each column contains an image of m×n = M pixels and there is N such columns. Furthermore, assume that we also have access to a Labeling vector p of size N ×1 that holds the name of the k-th player (Name-k) at location k, where k = 1...N. Since we know the (Index - Player Name) correspondence in vector p, the easiest way to perform Face Recognition would be to reorder the columns of the database D such that the image of the k-th player is at the k-th column of the matrix D. Then, by sending a query image, we can ﬁnd the column of the matrix D that holds an image which is most similar to our query image and then identify the player as player-k with name Name-k.

Program Functionality:  
(1) Construct the Image Database D.
(2) Unscramble the Database by reoordering its columns. The image of the player with ﬁlename player1.png should end up on the 1-st column of the database, the image of the player with ﬁlename player2.png should end up on the 2-nd column of the database, etc.
(3) Verify that the database has been properly reordered. To do this you use the same unscrambling function as above but providing the result of the previous unscrambling as an input. If the columns of the database do not change and they are sorted (from image of the player with ﬁlename player1.png to the image of the player with ﬁlename player100.png), this means that the reordering was successful. The reordering procedure can take some time to ﬁnish. However, once your function is implemented correctly and the reordering is properly done, the script will automatically store your correctly reordered matrix and will not perform reordering the next time you try to run your code.
(4) Plot the order of the indices before and after reordering.
(5) Read the image of player-k (your selected image). This k should correspond to the number in the ﬁle that holds your selected image, e.g., if the ﬁlename of the selected image in the folder Player Images has ﬁlename Player34.png then k, or else the variable PlayerNumber at the Initialization section of the LabProject.m script should be selected as 34.
(6) Calculate the column in both databases (before and after reordering) that is mostly similar to your picture.
(7) Calculate the PSNR between your picture and all images in both databases (before and after reordering).
(8) Pass these results as input arguments to the function identifyPlayer() using, ﬁrst, the randomly ordered database and then the properly reordered database in order to see the wrong and correct identiﬁcation of your image, respectively.
